22.0.0.11 beta post (#2605)
OpenLiberty/blogs: posts/2022-09-29-22.0.0.11-beta.adoc

---
layout: post
title: "InstantOn with checkpoint/restore in Open Liberty 22.0.0.11-beta!"
# Do NOT change the categories section
categories: blog
author_picture: https://avatars3.githubusercontent.com/reecenana
author_github: https://github.com/reecenana
seo-title: InstantOn with checkpoint/restore in Open Liberty 22.0.0.11-beta! - OpenLiberty.io
seo-description: InstantOn will have your applications starting at light speed! Developer experience and performance enhancements come to Jakarta EE 10 for Servlet, Mail, Connectors and Persistence.
blog_description: InstantOn will have your applications starting at light speed! Developer experience and performance enhancements come to Jakarta EE 10 for Servlet, Mail, Connectors and Persistence.
open-graph-image: https://openliberty.io/img/twitter_card.jpg
---
= InstantOn with checkpoint/restore in Open Liberty 22.0.0.11-beta!
Reece Nana <https://github.com/reecenana>
:imagesdir: /
:url-prefix:
:url-about: /
//Blank line here is necessary before starting the body of the post.

// // // // // // // //

> Open Liberty 22.0.0.11-beta provides an exciting new capability called InstantOn which provides very fast startup times in cloud-native applications, essential in serverless environments in which applications need to scale to zero when not in use but then start up again quickly when needed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Open Liberty 22.0.0.11-beta provides an exciting new capability called InstantOn, which provides incredibly fast startup times and can help reduce the overall cloud costs for cloud-native applications.
```

> Since the 22.0.0.9-beta release, which included Jakarta EE 10 Core Profile, Open Liberty has continued to beta more and more Jakarta EE 10 features.  This beta release introduces various developer experience and performance enhancements available through the following new Jakarta EE 10 features: Servlet 6.0, Mail 2.1, Connectors 2.1 and Persistance 3.1.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since the 22.0.0.9-beta release, which included the Jakarta EE 10 Core Profile, Open Liberty has continued to beta more and more Jakarta EE 10 features. This beta release introduces various developer experience and performance enhancements available through the following new Jakarta EE 10 features: Servlet 6.0, Mail 2.1, Connectors 2.1 and Persistance 3.1.
```

* <<instanton, InstantOn with checkpoint/restore>>
* <<jakarta, Jakarta EE 10 Updates>>
** <<servlet, Set any cookie attribute (Jakarta Servlet 6.0)>>
** <<mail, Simpler Jakarta Mail code compilation (Jakarta Mail 2.1)>>
** <<connectors, Ensure correctness of data types (Jakarta Connectors 2.1)>>
** <<persistence, JPQL and Criteria API enhancements (Jakarta Persistence 3.1)>>

// // // // // // // //

// https://github.com/OpenLiberty/open-liberty/issues/21977
[#instanton]
== InstantOn with checkpoint/restore 

Traditionally, starting an application can take several seconds, and sometimes minutes, before the application can service its first request. Longer startup times inhibit an application's ability to scale to zero when deployed in a cloud environment such as Kubernetes, which in turn can drive up costs. 

Liberty's InstantOn capability is an innovative way to drastically reduce that startup time by using link:https://criu.org/Main_Page[checkpoint/restore]. Restoring an application from a checkpoint process can be up to 10 times faster than starting the Liberty application from the beginning.

> For more information, see the link:{url-prefix}/blog/2022/09/27/instant-on-220011-beta.html[Liberty InstantOn startup for cloud native Java applications] blog post.

Reviewer: Has this post has been delayed until 9/30? just want to confirm this URL is correct and will work when this post publishes

Author: it's actually 9/29. updated url

> For more information, see the link:{url-prefix}/blog/2022/09/27/instant-on-220011-beta.html[Liberty InstantOn startup for cloud native Java applications] blog post.

Author: ```suggestion
For more information, see the link:{url-prefix}/blog/2022/09/29/instant-on-beta.html[Liberty InstantOn startup for cloud native Java applications] blog post.
```

[#jakarta]
== Jakarta EE 10 Updates

> With the 22.0.0.11-beta release, Open Liberty adds four more Jakarta EE 10 features: Mail 2.1, Servlet 6.0, Connectors 2.1 and Persistance 3.1.  These four features are in addition to all the Jakarta EE 10 features that have been previously released in a beta, including those that make up the link:{url-prefix}/blog/2022/08/04/jakarta-core-profile-22009-beta.html[Jakarta EE 10 Core Profile].  To review all the previous beta content, take a look at the recent link:{url-prefix}/blog/?search=beta&key=tag[beta blog posts].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the 22.0.0.11-beta release, Open Liberty adds four more Jakarta EE 10 features: Mail 2.1, Servlet 6.0, Connectors 2.1 and Persistance 3.1. These four features join the Jakarta EE 10 features from previous beta releases, including those that make up the link:{url-prefix}/blog/2022/08/04/jakarta-core-profile-22009-beta.html[Jakarta EE 10 Core Profile].  To review all the previous beta content, take a look at the recent link:{url-prefix}/blog/?search=beta&key=tag[beta blog posts].
```

To facilitate this improvement, Jakarta Mail 2.1 also introduces the link:https://jakarta.ee/specifications/mail/2.1/apidocs/jakarta.mail/jakarta/mail/util/streamprovider[jakarta.mail.util.StreamProvider] utility interface, which can be easily obtained with the `jakarta.mail.Session.getStreamProvider()` method. You can then use the `StreamProviders` instance to obtain encoded/decoded streams for any of the encoding/decoding methods that Jakarta Mail 2.1 supports.

You can enable the feature by adding `mail-2.1` to your `server.xml`:

[source, xml]
----
  <featureManager>
    <feature>mail-2.1</feature>
  </featureManager>
----

For more information about the Jakarta Mail 2.1 specification, check out the link:https://eclipse-ee4j.github.io/mail/[Jakarta Mail] project website.

// https://github.com/OpenLiberty/open-liberty/issues/22115
[#connectors]
=== Ensure correctness of data types (Jakarta Connectors 2.1)

> Jakarta Connectors standardizes how connectors to various enterprise information systems interact with the container and applications.  Jakarta Connectors 2.1 enables you to use the latest release of the link:https://github.com/eclipse-ee4j/jca-api[Jakarta resource specification] in your application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Jakarta Connectors standardizes how connectors to various enterprise information systems interact with the container and applications. Jakarta Connectors 2.1 enables you to use the latest release of the link:https://github.com/eclipse-ee4j/jca-api[Jakarta resource specification] in your application.
```

> The main update to Jakarta Connectors in this minor feature version update is the addition of Java generics support to the `jakarta.resource.cci.ResourceFactory`, `jakarta.resource.cci.IndexedRecord`, and `jakarta.resource.cci.MappedRecord` classes.  This helps avoid compiler warnings and help ensure correctness of data types during development time.

Reviewer 2: Consider changing "This helps avoid compiler warnings and help ensure correctness" to "This helps avoid compiler warnings and **also** help**s** ensure correctness"

Author: updated to "... and ensure correctness..."

> The main update to Jakarta Connectors in this minor feature version update is the addition of Java generics support to the `jakarta.resource.cci.ResourceFactory`, `jakarta.resource.cci.IndexedRecord`, and `jakarta.resource.cci.MappedRecord` classes.  This helps avoid compiler warnings and help ensure correctness of data types during development time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The main update to Jakarta Connectors in this minor feature version update is the addition of Java generics support to the `jakarta.resource.cci.ResourceFactory`, `jakarta.resource.cci.IndexedRecord`, and `jakarta.resource.cci.MappedRecord` classes. This helps avoid compiler warnings and also helps ensure correctness of data types during development time.
```

> The main update to Jakarta Connectors in this minor feature version update is the addition of Java generics support to the `jakarta.resource.cci.ResourceFactory`, `jakarta.resource.cci.IndexedRecord`, and `jakarta.resource.cci.MappedRecord` classes.  This helps avoid compiler warnings and help ensure correctness of data types during development time.

Author: ```suggestion
The main update to Jakarta Connectors in this minor feature version update is the addition of Java generics support to the `jakarta.resource.cci.ResourceFactory`, `jakarta.resource.cci.IndexedRecord`, and `jakarta.resource.cci.MappedRecord` classes.  This helps avoid compiler warnings and ensure correctness of data types during development time.
```

You can enable the feature by adding `connectors-2.1` to your `server.xml`:
[source, xml]
----
  <featureManager>
    <feature>connectors-2.1</feature>
  </featureManager>
----

All other `resourceAdapter` configurations within server.xml can remain unchanged for current applications.

You can find out more about this specific update with the following links:

* link:https://github.com/eclipse-ee4j/jca-api[Spec Project]
* link:https://mvnrepository.com/artifact/jakarta.resource/jakarta.resource-api[Spec API]
* link:https://jakarta.ee/specifications/connectors/2.1/apidocs/jakarta.resource/module-summary.html[Spec Javadoc]

// https://github.com/OpenLiberty/open-liberty/issues/22078
[#persistence]
=== JPQL and Criteria API enhancements (Jakarta Persistence 3.1)

Jakarta Persistence API (JPA) is a richly featured API that provides an object-model approach to persisting, fetching, and modifying data stored on a relational database system. Prior to the introduction of JPA in Java EE 5, in order to interact with database storage, you had to use EJB bean or container managed entities, or raw JDBC.

> Jakarta Persistence 3.1 is a minor version update but introduces some great new capabilities.  Developers can now take advantage of the `AutoClosable` interface, introduced in Java 7, which allows for resources declared in a try-with-resources block to be automatically closed upon the completion of that try block.  Other new features include the ability to use fields of type `java.lang.UUID` as `@Id` types and enhancements to Java Persistence Query Language (JPQL) and Criteria API. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Jakarta Persistence 3.1 is a minor version update but introduces some great new capabilities. You can now take advantage of the `AutoClosable` interface, introduced in Java 7, which allows for resources declared in a try-with-resources block to be automatically closed upon the completion of that try block.  Other new features include the ability to use fields of type `java.lang.UUID` as `@Id` types and enhancements to Java Persistence Query Language (JPQL) and Criteria API. 
```

---
layout: post

> title: "InstantOn With Checkpoint and Restore in Open liberty 22.0.0.11-beta!"

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
title: "InstantOn with checkpoint/restore in Open Liberty 22.0.0.11-beta!"
```

Reviewer 3: Apply this throughout - the term is "checkpoint/restore". And titles/headings should be sentence-case, not capitals on every word. And Liberty should be capitalised as a name.

# Do NOT change the categories section
categories: blog
author_picture: https://avatars3.githubusercontent.com/reecenana
author_github: https://github.com/reecenana
seo-title: InstantOn With Checkpoint and Restore in Open liberty 22.0.0.11-beta! - OpenLiberty.io
seo-description: InstantOn will have your applications starting at light speed! Developer experience and performance enhancements come to Jakarta EE 10 for Servlet, Mail, Connectors and Persistence.
blog_description: InstantOn will have your applications starting at light speed! Developer experience and performance enhancements come to Jakarta EE 10 for Servlet, Mail, Connectors and Persistence.
open-graph-image: https://openliberty.io/img/twitter_card.jpg
---
= InstantOn With Checkpoint and Restore in Open liberty 22.0.0.11-beta!
Reece Nana <https://github.com/reecenana>
:imagesdir: /
:url-prefix:
:url-about: /
//Blank line here is necessary before starting the body of the post.

// // // // // // // //

> Open Liberty 22.0.0.11-beta provides an exciting new capability called InstantOn which allows applications to checkpoint the startup process and restore the application process very quickly, providing instant-on behavior for your application.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Open Liberty 22.0.0.11-beta provides an exciting new capability called InstantOn which provides very fast startup times in cloud-native applications, essential in serverless environments in which applications need to scale to zero when not in use but then start up again quickly when needed.
```

Reviewer 3: Talk about the benefit it brings, not how it works.

> Since the 22.0.0.9-beta release which included Jakarta EE 10 Core Profile, Open Liberty has continued to beta more and more Jakarta EE 10 features.  This beta release introduces various developer experience and performance enhancements available through the following new Jakarta EE 10 features: Servlet 6.0, Mail 2.1, Connectors 2.1 and Persistance 3.1.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Since the 22.0.0.9-beta release, which included Jakarta EE 10 Core Profile, Open Liberty has continued to beta more and more Jakarta EE 10 features.  This beta release introduces various developer experience and performance enhancements available through the following new Jakarta EE 10 features: Servlet 6.0, Mail 2.1, Connectors 2.1 and Persistance 3.1.
```

// // // // // // // //

The link:{url-about}[Open Liberty] 22.0.0.11-beta includes the following new beta features (along with link:{url-prefix}/docs/latest/reference/feature/feature-overview.html[all GA features]):

> * <<instanton, InstantOn With Checkpoint and Restore>>

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* <<instanton, InstantOn with checkpoint/restore>>
```

Reviewer 3: Change throughout the blog post too.

* <<jakarta, Jakarta EE 10 Updates>>
** <<servlet, Set any cookie attribute (Jakarta Servlet 6.0)>>
** <<mail, Simpler Jakarta Mail code compilation (Jakarta Mail 2.1)>>
** <<connectors, Ensure correctness of data types (Jakarta Connectors 2.1)>>
** <<persistence, JPQL and Criteria API enhancements (Jakarta Persistence 3.1)>>

// // // // // // // //

// https://github.com/OpenLiberty/open-liberty/issues/21977
[#instanton]
== InstantOn With Checkpoint and Restore

Traditionally, starting an application can take several seconds, and sometimes minutes, before the application can service its first request. Longer startup times inhibit an application's ability to scale to zero when deployed in a cloud environment such as Kubernetes, which in turn can drive up costs. 

> Liberty's InstantOn capability is an innovative way to drastically reduce that startup time by using link:https://criu.org/Main_Page[Checkpoint and Restore]. Restoring an application from a checkpoint process can be up to 10 times faster than starting the Liberty application from the beginning.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Liberty's InstantOn capability is an innovative way to drastically reduce that startup time by using link:https://criu.org/Main_Page[checkpoint/restore]. Restoring an application from a checkpoint process can be up to 10 times faster than starting the Liberty application from the beginning.
```

[#servlet]
===  Set any cookie attribute (Jakarta Servlet 6.0)

The Open Liberty Jakarta Servlet 6.0 (`servlet-6.0`) feature is an implementation of the Jakarta EE 10 Servlet 6.0 specification. It includes a number of new features, specification clarifications, and deprecation features.

Before Jakarta Servlet 6.0, only a few specific methods could be set for an application's cookie attributes. This meant that an application could not easily set a new attribute, such as the recent browser security `SameSite` attribute. 

One of the new features in Jakarta Servlet 6.0 is the ability to set any attribute using a cookie's `setAttribute` method. In addition, Jakarta Servlet 6.0 also introduces some new request APIs to aid the application's debugging. Application developers can track or refer to a request using the `ServletRequest()` `getRequestId()` method or obtain details of the network connection that is being used by the request by calling `ServletRequest()` `getServletConnection()` method.

You can activate the feature by adding `servlet-6.0` to your `server.xml`:

[source, xml]
----
   <featureManager>
       <feature>servlet-6.0</feature>
   </featureManager>
----

>  For more information, refer to the link:https://jakarta.ee/specifications/servlet/6.0/[Jakarta Servlet 6.0 Specification and Javadocs].

Author: ```suggestion
For more information, refer to the link:https://jakarta.ee/specifications/servlet/6.0/[Jakarta Servlet 6.0 Specification and Javadocs].
```
